# Comparing-incarceration-rate-in-Baltimore-MD-and-Washington-DC-
This repository compares the incarceration rate in Baltimore, MD and Washington DC and analyzes the relationship between the incarceration rate and parents income (family background).
Background 
https://www.prisonpolicy.org/blog/2020/01/16/percent-incarcerated/
https://www.statista.com/statistics/300986/incarceration-rates-in-oecd-countries/#:~:text=Incarceration%20rates%20in%20OECD%20countries%20as%20of%20May%202020&text=The%20incarceration%20rate%20represents%20the,prisoners%20per%20100%2C000%20U.S.%20residents.
https://www.vox.com/identities/2018/3/14/17114226/incarceration-family-income-parents-study-brookings-rich-kid-poor-kid
According to the 2020 data from OECD, US has the highest incarceration rate among OECD countries and about 0.7% of the United States are currently in jail according to Prison Policy Initiative policy data. Specifically, I am going to compare the incarceration rate of Baltimore, Maryland where is known for their high crime rate and Washington, DC. Although, I wasn't born in United States, but I stay in DC every break since my older sister lives there, so I consider DC my second hometown.I am going to use metrics of incarceration rates of parent income of all percentile, 75th percentile, 50th percentile, and 25th percentile. These metrics particularly grabbed my attention since there are many reports and analysis on the relationship between incarceration rate and race, but not necessarily for the relationship between parents income (family financial background) and incarceration rate. I wanted to explore whether the background or environment you grew up as a child significanlty affects the likelihood of incarceration, and if so, I wanted to provide some solutions that could possibly help Baltimore lower their incarceration rate and in general, make a better and safer palce to live. And people who came out of jail tend to have negatively affected in terms of employment and income according to  and  Moreover, Baltimore is well known for their high crime rate, but Washington was also called as a "Murder Capital" because of its high crime rate, though it got much safer to live in DC right now. So, I though it would be interesting to compare those two cities and look if there are any differences or similarities in those metrics. 
A brief statement summarizing background information about your initial problem statement (e.g. the two cities, the metric that you are exploring, and why this is interesting to you). Here you should include any links to relevant outside sources as well.

Business question: Does one's family economic status (degree of financial stability) affects one's life trajectories, specifically the likelihood of imprisonment?

Excel Files
[Click for Excel] https://github.com/michellesykim/Comparing-incarceration-rate-in-Baltimore-MD-and-Washington-DC-/commit/66cd81ff4c04aa0e56bc74065af62a590ba7433b
Attached file is the incarceration rate data from Baltimore city that I used for the analysis. This file not only includes the incarceration rate from all parents income, but also includes the incarceration rate from 75th percentile parents income, 50th percentile parents income, and 25th percentile parents income by using VLOOKUP and tract numbers. 

[Click for Excel] https://github.com/michellesykim/Comparing-incarceration-rate-in-Baltimore-MD-and-Washington-DC-/commit/050bb6acba7581b6b9e9585a8c378c937a336c11
Attached file is the incarceration rate data from Washington, DC that I used for the analysis. This file not only includes the incarceration rate from all parents income, but also includes the incarceration rate from 75th percentile parents income, 50th percentile parents income, and 25th percentile parents income by using VLOOKUP and tract numbers. 

As you can see three graphs here, as the parents income percentile gets lower (as the parents income get lower), there is an increase in the number of neighborhoods for higher rate of incarceration compared to high parents income percentile. For instance, for 75th percentile parents income (high income) , most of the neighborhoods in Baltimore have the incarceration rate range of 0 ~ 0.4, and for 50th percentile parents (median income), most neighborhoods in Baltimore have the incarceration rate of 0.02 ~ 0.05, and lastly for 25th percentile parents income (low income), most neighborhoods in Baltimore have the incarceration rate range of 0.04 ~ 0.06, and specifically 45 neighborhoods out of 197 have 0.6% of incarceration rate. This could also be explained with the skewness of each histogram. Histogram of incarceraton rate of 75th percentile parents income has the highest skewness of 1.81 where the skewness of 25th percentile parents income is the lowest which is 0.21. This indicates that both have positive skewness but the values for the 25th percentile histogram are extended much more further to the right compared to other two histograms. 

Similar result for DC. this similarity indiciates and highlights that children who grew up under poor parents tend to have higher possibilty of incarceration compared to children who grew up under rich parents. 

Now, combining two line graphs from Baltimore city and Washington, DC show similar pattern where low parents income negatively affects the incarceration rate of their children. However, one significant difference is that the for baltimore, it has a very high peak that stands out for 0.06% of incarceration rate. This not only tells that there are more neighborhoods in Baltimore city that have the incarceration rate of 0.06-0.7 but also tells that children who grew up under poor parents (25th percentile) in are more vulnerable in Baltimore city than Washington, DC, thus, low parents income has more significan impact on higher incarceration rate in Baltimore. 

Looking at the pivot tables for Washington, DC and Baltimore City, the average incarceration rate of all parent income are higher for all subgroups of all parents income, 75th percentile, 50th percentile, and 25th percentile in Baltmore compared to Washington, DC. This indicates that Baltimore city in general has a higher rate of incarceration than Washington, DC. This also shows that as the parents income percentile gets lower, the average incarceration rate gets higher. For both cities, incarceration rate of 25th percentile parents income increased more than 100% from 75th percentile value. 

A brief summary of how the numerical findings relate back to your initial question, what you can answer based on your data analysis, what additional data might be helpful for you to build on these findings, and why this is important for you

Multiple data analysis that I conducted show that in both Washington, DC and Baltimore city, the trend is that for 75th percentile parents income, most cities tend to have lower rate of incarceration and vice versa. And also the avearge incarceration rate for each parents income in both cities show that incarceration rate of poor parents increased more than 100% from the incarceration of wealthy parents. This definitley relates back to my business question. These all together show that one's family (parents) income (degree of financial stability) affects children tragectories especially their incarceration rate. Growing up in poverty increases the likelihood of incarceration and children who grew up under wealthy paretns tend to have less incarceration rate. Additional data on the term of imprisonment could help to see how specifically and significantly one's family financial stituation has affected their childrens life. It would also helpful to know if the difference in imprison rates between high income parents and low income parents is the result of a difference in actual criminal offense or a result of poor parenting and parents' lack of parental involvement. 소ㅑ
Multiple data analysis that I conducted show that in both Washington, DC and Baltimore city, the trend is that for 75th percentile parents income, most cities tend to have lower rate of incarceration and vice versa. And also the avearge incarceration rate for each parents income in both cities show that incarceration rate of poor parents increased more than 100% from the incarceration of wealthy parents. This definitley relates back to my business question. These all together show that one's family (parents) income (degree of financial stability) affects children tragectories especially their incarceration rate. Growing up in poverty increases the likelihood of incarceration and children who grew up under wealthy paretns tend to have less incarceration rate. Additional data on the term of imprisonment could help to see how specifically and significantly one's family financial stituation has affected their childrens life. It would also helpful to know if the difference in imprison rates between high income parents and low income parents is the result of a difference in actual criminal offense or a result of poor parenting and parents' lack of parental involvement to see why low parents income might have the negative effect on children's incarceration rate. This analysis and the answer to my business question is important to me since looking at the relationship between the parents income and incarceration rate, and if we could know what exactly affects the lower parents income to affect incarceration rate negatively, for example, is it because they do not have enough moeny to suppor their child's education? is it because they tend to have lower parental involvement at school? if we could answer these questions, this would definitley help provide effective solutions for parents who have lower income and stop this trend and make this place a better and safer place to live and stop people to face these kinds of problem anymore. It not importnat just for me, but for everyone in the society to make a place where people from various socioeconomical backgroudns can have a better life. 







maybe divide in age groups who were incarcerated to see how long the background effect lasts
whether the massive difference in imprisonment rates between rich and poor Americans is the result of a difference in rates of actual criminal offense or a result of pervasive discrimination and aggressive policing of poor communities.
